Project/Program Charter (PCH)
<The Project/Program Charter (PCH) is the key and mandatory document to start a project. It formally authorizes the project manager to start the program or project work. It aims at formalizing the DTD customer expectations, defining the expected benefits of the project as well as providing a first estimation of project costs, time, risks. The Program Charter defines the shared benefit that the program aims to achieve as well as the list of projects included in the program.>
Project identification
Project
IFRC Network Data Portal
Date
Project request: <Date of project request>
Project request approval: <Date of project request's approval>
Costs
<Development costs range>
þ  Existing Core Budget
o Project budget
o Requires new funding
Requested by
Strategic Planning
Effort
Medium <High, medium, low> (see appendix for evaluation)
Brief description
The IFRC Network Databank Portal is a unified digital platform for managing federation-wide data collection processes. It provides a backend system for designing forms, assigning reporting tasks, and managing indicators. The platform consolidates multiple fragmented data collection tools into a single standardized system.
Project’s value to business
<Is it really what we need? What will change from the current situation?>
IFRC business outcomes
<Give 2 to 5 high level IFRC outcomes using bullet point format.>
Improved federation-wide data standardization and governance.
Increased transparency and accessibility of National Society data across the network.
Reduced operational costs by consolidating multiple data systems.
Enhanced decision-making through integrated analytics and reporting capabilities.
Strengthened collaboration between IFRC Secretariat and National Societies through a shared data platform.
Project / Department outcomes
<List how the project delivers outcomes that lead to IFRC business outcomes. Give also department or cross departments business outcomes.>
Centralized platform to manage IFRC data collection processes (FDRS, Unified Planning, Unified Reporting).
Standardized use of the Indicator Bank across all reporting exercises.
Improved collaboration between FDS, PMER, regional teams and National Societies.
Reduced administrative workload associated with manual data management.
Improve quality of data and make it more accessible to the other departments through API connections and Excel exports.
Project benefits
The project will deliver operational efficiency, improved data quality and reduced costs through consolidation of data collection systems.
Goal/Objective (with measurable indicator if possible)
Current value
Target future value
Number of platforms used for IFRC network data collection
Multiple systems (Kobo, Excel, FDRS, etc.)
Single unified platform
Data accessibility
Limited access across teams
Federation-wide access
Data collection duplication
Frequent duplicate requests
Significant reduction
System development cost
High cost for new systems
Minimal cost AI-assisted development
Reporting speed
Slow manual consolidation
Faster automated analytics
Rejection risk
IFRC will continue relying on fragmented tools and manual data collection processes.
Duplicate reporting requests to National Societies will persist.
Data standardization through the Indicator Bank will remain difficult to enforce.
Valuable datasets will remain underutilized.
Costs and inefficiencies associated with maintaining multiple systems will continue.
Project’s scope
< Is the project feasible? Is it related to another project? Does it need other software, services?>
Scope definition
In Scope:
<List here all important component / output that define the scope. For Programs, list here the program activities ans components (projects)>
Who will be affected in a positive or negative way by this project?
IFRC Secretariat and National Societies PMER and data teams.
What is the training effort requested in term of HR (in Geneva/ elsewhere)?
Onboarding IFRC admins and focal points in both HQ and regional offices, and focal points from IFRC country offices and NSs through regional focused online demo sessions.
What is the impact of the roll-out in term of HR and infrastructure? HR: Expected reduction in time wasted on repetitive tasks due to system automation and less human errors (automated comms, reminders, excel breaking).
Infrastructure: reduction of resources used for Power Platform, and proper storage for data which currently is floating everywhere with huge loss risks.
What processes need to be redesigned?
Unified Planning and Reporting data collection.
Out of Scope:
Full migration of historical legacy systems at initial launch.
Scope uncertainty:
Some functionalities (AI document processing, advanced integrations) will evolve after initial deployment.
Dependencies
Code review and security validation by DTD
Hosting infrastructure and cloud deployment
Integration with Indicator Bank
Participation of National Societies in pilot testing
B2C Authentication
Penetration testing findings
Time Frame
Phase 1:
Development (Q4 2025)
Infrastructure Hosting & Authentication (Q4 2025/ Q1 2026)
Testing with PMER and National Societies (Q1 2026)
Penetration testing (March 2026)
Training manual & conduct trainings (Q1/Q2 2026)
IT code review (March-April 2026)
Documentation (Mar-Apr 2026)
Launch:
Rollout before the Unified Mid-Year Reporting data collection (April-May 2026)
Project’s strategic alignment
<What strategy does the project meet?>
Links to strategy
<Give direct links between project and strategies if any. Give references with pages or quotes to strategies such as: Published Secretariat strategy / Decision of Directors / Internal Division or Department strategy / Management policies / Budget / Plan.>
The project aligns with IFRC priorities to improve data management, transparency and accountability across the Federation network.
IT/Cloud Strategy alignment:
The system is hosted on IFRC Azure app services.
<Please describe how the project aligns with the cloud roadmap; if an interim move, what components may be discarded in a future cloud-based phase and at what cost; how the cloud roadmap will impact this system; and how this system impacts the cloud roadmap.  The Cloud Migration plans are predicated on each ISD project contributing to the migration as part of ISD normal course of project business. So it is imperative that each project contribute to the roadmap.>
IT and Organization Risks addressed /mitigated by the project delivery:
<Please list here the IT risks that the project will close or partially address once project will be completed. Please go through the IT risk register in the DTD Team Site. Also consider the top 9 enterprise risks in Appendix B of this document to check the list of known risks>
No
Risk Description
How project will address it? To what extend?
1
Fragmented data systems across IFRC
Consolidates multiple tools (Kobo, Excel, separate platforms) into a unified system.
2
Inconsistent indicators and reporting standards
Integrates the Indicator Bank to enforce standardized indicators and definitions
3
Data loss and limited data reuse
Centralized database preserves data and makes it accessible for analysis and reporting.
4
Limited transparency and accountability
Audit trail tracks all actions performed by admins and focal points.
5
High operational costs from maintaining multiple systems
Consolidation reduces maintenance and development costs.
6
Poor data accessibility across IFRC teams
Self-service reporting and APIs allow broader data access and analytics.
Key roles and responsibilities
<Who are the main project stakeholders and what are their key responsibilities and accountabilities?>
Business Owner
Rania Alereksoussi, Manager, Federation-Wide RBM & Data Systems
Defines Product Vision & Goals;
Is ultimately accountable for project success;
Ensures key decisions are performed through PSC (Project Steering Committee);
Approves and signs-off on the project delivery;
DT Sponsor
Juriaan Lahr, Director, DTD
Provides directions to Project Steering Committee
Strategic-level products decisions taken at the Product Steerco
Business Sponsor
Pascale Meige, Director, Strategic Planning
Strategic-level products decisions taken at the Product Steerco
DT Product Unit Manager
Emmanuelle Menard-Marchand, Manager, Digital Unit
Approves handover of DIT solutions to DIT Services;
Supports and maintains project delivery after its hand-over.
Dev Team
Zoltan Szabo/ Szabolcs Gajer, Application Support
Development support;
Prepare Production Environment;
Implement monitoring & alerting;
Code Review (AI Scanning);
Solution Architecture review;
Provide support (based on agreement & SteerCo decision);
Assessing AI product quality.
Infra Team
Gabor Palatinus, Team Leader, Infra Support
Infrastructure & IT Security related tasks
Penetration testing
Part of the Product SteerCo
DT EA Strategy & Planning Manager
Alvaro Alvarez, Manager, EA, Strategy & Planning
EA & Planning Support
Part of the Product SteerCo
DT PMO
Isabelle Noverraz, Senior Officer, Planning, PMO & Oversight
Defining project control levels based on project tailoring assessment;
Performs regular bi-weekly project reviews;
Provides guidance to PMs, related to project management activities and actions;
Collects and merges status reports from all projects individually and submits consolidated version to DIT SC.
DT Project Manager
Marie-France Shakour, Project Manager
Ensures project success;
Organizes and facilitates PSC;
Performs project decisions within limits set by PSC;
Reports on project status;
Implements agreed tailored project controls;
ARB & Release Planning.
Product Owner
Carlota Tarazona, Senior Officer, Federation-Wide Data Analyst
Conduct user research, interviews, surveys, usability tests;
Map stakeholder needs and pain points;
Translate user needs into backlog items;
Prioritize backlog items;
Training material preparation.
Business Owner/ Dev Team
Haytham Al Soufi, Senior Officer, Federation-Wide Data Analysis
AI-Assisted Development and integration
Solution Architecture preparation
Vulnerabilities remediation
Document learnings from AI-assisted development
Exploring other AI-assisted activities
AI Lead
Stefano Ongarello, Manager, Data & AI Unit Manager
Advise on AI assisted Activities
AI Learnings and best practices
Solution Architect
Rajesh Nair
Architecture Support and decisions
Project’s risk evaluation
<Is the project feasible? Will we get the expected results?>
Risks
<Indicate the main high-level risks that have already been identified.>
Delivery Risks
B2C Authentication Readiness
Capability of IT to perform code review (leverage AI)
Availability of resources to fix pentest vulnerabilities
Availability of a resource for Support
Complexity of the documentation to the team which may induce delays
Operational
Users confusion during to B2C login
Project’s development cost
Cost type
Amount in CHF
Details / Assumptions
HR Costs
0
Project Management (ext)
0
Hardware
0
Software: Licenses / Service fees
0
Consulting services
0
0 days * 0 CHF/day
Training & documentation
0
Travel and expenses
0
Training / Communication
0
External costs total
CHF 0  ± 0 %
estimated variance
Project Management (int)
0
0.25 man months
Sponsoring Dept resources
0
1. man months (officer level) Requir. &  Implem
ISD resources
0
0.75 man months (officer level) Requir. &  Implem
<2014 internal costs: Manager=255’240;Sr Officer=186’240;Officer=153’240;Sr Assistant=141’240>
Funding
Indicate if project is programme funded, core funded or other
Project’s outcome future operational cost
<Amount can be additional cost or savings. Is there an increase or decrease in operational cost due to the project delivery?>
Cost type
Amount
Details
Infrastructure costs
0
Project within architecture: 10% of development cost
Project outside architecture: 20% of development cost
Current cost
0
Cost for features suppressed / replaced by this project
Difference
0
Amount can be additional cost or savings
On going cost outside ITD
0
Approval section
Role
Name and Title
Signature
Date
Project sponsor
<Usually a Under Secretary General>
Business champion
<Business champion - usually a Director Of Department>
DT Director
<Head of ISD>
PMO
<Head of PMO>
<Stakeholder to be defined>
<OPTIONAL - A second  stakeholder might approve the project>
PCH Manager
<Who has been appointed as the project charter manager?>
Decision: <Project approved by IT-SC on xyz or by the sign-off of this PCH>
Document History
Version number
Date
Author
Details / Comments
0.0
2013-03-28
Licensed user
< << <<< END OF DOCUMENT >>> >> >
Appendix A – IFRC top 9 Enterprise risks
Enterprise Risks
Risk that the IFRC is not recognised worldwide as the leading humanitarian network of national organisations, resulting in the organisation not being able to operate effectively  in disaster and crisis situations with global dimensions
Risk that there would be an imbalance between funds available and funding required delivering appropriate and timely services to members and beneficiaries.
Risk of ineffective or incoherent governance that prevents a Federation-wide harmonized approach to planning, performance management, risk management and accountability, which could adversely impact the consistency and the quality of services.
Risk that people management is not addressed appropriately and timely, which could lead to adversely affecting the delivery and quality of services.
Risk that National Societies and the Secretariat do not speak with one voice on key issues concerning all, resulting in adversely impacting the functionality and image of the organisation.
Risk of non-compliance with international/local regulations or legal obligations may adversely affect the image and reputation of the organisation.
Risk that services delivered by the IFRC do not meet the expectations and needs of National Societies and beneficiaries, which could adversely affect market share and credibility of the organisation.
Risk that Global trends are not sufficiently monitored and considered in shaping the organisation and preparing it for future needs, resulting in an adverse impact on its effectiveness and credibility.
Risk that the recruitment, training, and retention of volunteers is declining or not expanding to meet the needs of the organisation, which could adversely affect the delivery and quality of services.
Appendix B – Help section to fill-in the PCH
A - Project Effort Definition
The project effort is based on the effort requested by the three main actors: The project manager, staff from the department sponsoring the project and ISD staff.
For each actor, the time that will be dedicated to the project has to be defined.
Project effort is then defined by the highest effort among the three actors’ efforts.
Low effort project must requiredless than 1 man month project manager time,less than 0.5 man month sponsoring department resources time,and less than 0.5 man month ISD resources time.Medium effort project must requiredless 6  man month project manager time,less 3 man month sponsoring department resources time,and less 3 man month ISD resources time.High effort project has one of the actors that will spendmore 6  man month for project manager,more 3 man month for sponsoring department resources,or more 3 man month for ISD resources.Low effort project must requiredless than 1 man month project manager time,less than 0.5 man month sponsoring department resources time,and less than 0.5 man month ISD resources time.Medium effort project must requiredless 6  man month project manager time,less 3 man month sponsoring department resources time,and less 3 man month ISD resources time.High effort project has one of the actors that will spendmore 6  man month for project manager,more 3 man month for sponsoring department resources,or more 3 man month for ISD resources.
Low effort project must required
less than 1 man month project manager time,
less than 0.5 man month sponsoring department resources time,
and less than 0.5 man month ISD resources time.
Medium effort project must required
less 6  man month project manager time,
less 3 man month sponsoring department resources time,
and less 3 man month ISD resources time.
High effort project has one of the actors that will spend
more 6  man month for project manager,
more 3 man month for sponsoring department resources,
or more 3 man month for ISD resources.
Low effort project must required
less than 1 man month project manager time,
less than 0.5 man month sponsoring department resources time,
and less than 0.5 man month ISD resources time.
Medium effort project must required
less 6  man month project manager time,
less 3 man month sponsoring department resources time,
and less 3 man month ISD resources time.
High effort project has one of the actors that will spend
more 6  man month for project manager,
more 3 man month for sponsoring department resources,
or more 3 man month for ISD resources.
HIGHHIGH 3 man month  3 man month 3 man month3 man monthMEDIUMMEDIUMProject Manager Time (Manage project)Project Manager Time (Manage project)ISD Resources Time (Provide technical information and work on the project)ISD Resources Time (Provide technical information and work on the project)Sponsoring Department Resources Time (Define requirements)Sponsoring Department Resources Time (Define requirements)0.5 man month0.5 man month0.5 man month0.5 man month1 man month1 man month6 man month6 man monthLOWLOW
HIGH
HIGH
3 man month
3 man month
3 man month
3 man month
MEDIUM
MEDIUM
Project Manager Time (Manage project)
Project Manager Time (Manage project)
ISD Resources Time (Provide technical information and work on the project)
ISD Resources Time (Provide technical information and work on the project)
Sponsoring Department Resources Time (Define requirements)
Sponsoring Department Resources Time (Define requirements)
0.5 man month
0.5 man month
0.5 man month
0.5 man month
1 man month
1 man month
6 man month
6 man month
LOW
LOW